README.md, before:

# grapple

A modern web project built with Astro, TypeScript, and Bun.

## Features

- ⚡ **Astro v5** with modern performance optimizations
- 🎨 **Tailwind CSS** with shadcn/ui components  
- 📱 **View Transitions** for smooth navigation
- 🖼️ **Image Optimization** with Sharp
- 🔧 **TypeScript** strict mode with type-safe environment variables
- 🧪 **Biome** + Ultracite for lightning-fast linting
- 🐛 **Lefthook** for git hooks
- 📦 **Bun** for fast package management and builds

## Getting Started

```bash
# Install dependencies
bun install

# Start development server
bun run dev

# Build for production
bun run build

# Preview production build
bun run preview
```

## Development

- **Format code**: `bun run format`
- **Lint code**: `bun run lint`
- **Type check**: `bun run typecheck`

## Deployment

The site is configured for static deployment to Cloudflare Pages, Vercel, or any static hosting service.

Built from [bun-monorepo-template](https://github.com/galligan/bun-monorepo-template).

Commit message:

feat: configure project for claude code hooks tooling
- update package name to @outfitter/grapple
- set proper repository URL to outfitter-dev/grapple
- update description and keywords for claude code hooks
- customize README for grapple's purpose and structure
- ready to build claude code hook utilities

README.md, after:

# @outfitter/grapple

A monorepo dedicated to tooling for Claude Code hooks.

## Overview

Grapple provides utilities, tools, and libraries for building and managing Claude Code hooks - from simple pre-commit formatters to complex multi-agent workflows.

## Features

- 🔧 **TypeScript** strict mode with comprehensive type safety
- 🧪 **Biome** + Ultracite for lightning-fast linting
- 🐛 **Lefthook** for git hooks
- 📦 **Bun** for fast package management and builds
- ⚡ **Turbo** for efficient monorepo management
- 🎯 **Claude Code** hook utilities and patterns

## Getting Started

```bash
# Install dependencies
bun install

# Start development
bun run dev

# Build all packages
bun run build

# Run tests
bun run test
```

## Development

- **Format code**: `bun run format`
- **Lint code**: `bun run lint`
- **Type check**: `bun run typecheck`

## Monorepo Structure

- **apps/**: Applications and examples
- **packages/**: Reusable libraries and utilities for Claude Code hooks

## Contributing

1. Create feature branches for all changes
2. Follow conventional commit messages
3. Run linting and type checking before committing
4. Use PRs for code review

Built from [bun-monorepo-template](https://github.com/galligan/bun-monorepo-template).
